[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
CASEY RODRIGUEZ:
So let's continue
our discussion of series.
So last time, we proved
the comparison test
at the end of last time.
So this was the comparison test.
So which is a statement about
series with non-negative terms,
with one being smaller
than the other.
And one of two things,
or two things are true.
If I have xn and yn
non-negative with yn
bigger than or equal to
xn, then the conclusion
is, if the bigger
series converges,
this implies that the
smaller series converges.
And the second statement is,
if the smaller series diverges,
then the larger series diverges.
And we also proved not
using the comparison test,
but for p-series, that
the series 1 sum from n
equals 1 to infinity of 1 over
n to the p, This converges.
Well, I mean, we did
use a comparison test
for one direction, I guess.
So 1 over n to the p
converges if and only
if p is bigger than 1.
So this converging
implied p has to be
bigger than 1 by
the comparison test
and what we know about
the harmonic series
1 over n, sum of 1 over n.
So typically, in applications
you use these two theorems
together.
To say something about series
that don't look so simple.
So for example, if I
look at the series, 1
over n squared plus 2020n,
n equals 1 to infinity.
So one could ask, does
this converge, diverge?
Well, this is a series
with non-negative terms.
And remember, I mean,
the bigger thing
has to converge to imply that
the smaller thing converges.
And if the smaller
thing diverges,
then the bigger thing diverges.
So don't get the
inequalities mixed up.
So I have 1 over n
squared plus 2020n.
This 2020 times n is just making
things bigger on the bottom
and therefore smaller overall.
So this is less than or
equal to 1 over n squared.
And since this converges, this
implies by the comparison test
that sum from n equals 1
to infinity of 1 over n
squared plus 2020n
also converges.
Now, a mistake I'm sure
we've all made at some point
is mixing up the
inequality and not
getting quite the right answer.
So for example, it is
also true that 1 over n
squared plus 2020n is certainly
less than or equal to 1
over 2020 times n, which is also
less than or equal to 1 over n.
And so, you're tempted to
say, since this diverges,
it implies the other
series diverges.
But this is not right.
Because the inequality is wrong.
Remember, if you want to
apply the comparison test,
you either have to have a
bigger series which converges
or a smaller series
which diverges.
Here we came up with a
bigger series which diverges,
which gives us no
information at all.
If we have a bigger
series, like 1 over n
squared that we
know converges, then
do we get information
about the original series.
So let's do another
well-known test,
or at least test you should
remember from calculus,
so-called ratio test.
So what is a statement of this?
So suppose xn does
not equal 0 for all n.
And this limit l
equals limit as n
goes to infinity of x to the
n plus 1 over x to the n,
an absolute value exists.
Then, if l is less than 1 this
implies that the series xn
converges absolutely.
And if l is bigger than 1,
then the series diverges.
Now, what about l equals 1?
There's no information
for l equals 1.
Meaning you could have a
series so that this l equals 1.
And you could have a
series where it diverges.
And you could also have a series
where l equals 1 and the series
converges.
So for example, if xn equals
1 over n, for example.
Or I mean, even worse,
let's say 1 for all n.
But we know that the
series 1 diverges.
Because the individual
terms do not converge to 0.
They're just 1 the whole time.
But for xn equals,
let's say, 1 over n
squared, so the one we
just saw a minute ago,
implies l, which
is the limit as n
goes to infinity of n plus
1 squared over n squared
equals the limit as
n goes to infinity.
Dividing through, one
plus 1 over n squared,
this equals 1 plus
0 squared equals 1.
So for this series, the root
or the ratio gives this l is 1.
And this series converges.
So again, for the
case that l equals 1,
we have no information.
We can't say anything based on--
this theorem gives
us no information.
So we're going to prove
this theorem basically by--
so we're not exactly going
to use a comparison test.
But we are still going to
compare this series satisfying
one of these two assumptions
to a series we know,
which is namely the ratio
test for number one.
So first off, let's get
number two out of the way.
So let's suppose l
is bigger than 1.
Let alpha be a number
between 1 and l.
Actually, we don't
even need to do that.
So here's-- here
is 1, here is l.
So since xn plus 1 over xn
absolute value converges to l,
there exists an integer M0.
So that's a natural number.
So that for all n bigger
than or equal to M0,
xn plus 1 over xn
in absolute value
is bigger than or equal to--
so here, you could write 1 as--
this is equal to l plus--
I should say, minus--
l minus 1.
So think of this as being
epsilon in the definition
of convergence.
And so, this is over
here. l plus l minus 1.
So by the definition
of convergence,
for all n sufficiently
large, xn plus 1
over xn in absolute value
has to be in this interval.
So it has to be bigger
than or equal to 1.
Which implies that for all n
bigger than or equal to M0,
xn plus 1 is bigger
than or equal to xn.
And so, I could write this as
saying that x M0 is less than
or equal to x M0 plus 1, is less
than or equal to x M0 plus 2,
and so on.
But this implies that these xn's
cannot converge to 0 as n goes
to infinity.
Because for all n bigger
than or equal to M0,
they are increasing.
And the only way for
an increasing sequence
which is non-negative to
converge to zeros for them
all to be 0.
And we're assuming
they're not 0.
So that proves two.
Let's prove one.
So suppose l is now less than 1.
And now, let alpha be a
number between l and 1.
So I just want to give
myself a little bit of room,
to work as you'll
see in just a second.
So by the same
reasoning as before,
so here's l, alpha 1 alpha.
I can write as l
plus alpha minus l.
So I should think of this
as kind of an epsilon.
Then since xn plus 1 over xn
in absolute value converges
to l, which is less
than alpha, there
exists in M0 natural number.
So that, for all M bigger
than or equal to M0,
xn plus 1 over xn
in absolute value
is less than or equal to alpha.
So here I have alpha just
a little bit bigger than l.
And if I draw--
so this is l minus
alpha minus l.
So since I have this
sequence here converging
to l for all
insufficiently large,
this should be in this interval.
Meaning this should be less
than or equal to alpha.
Then for all n bigger
than or equal to 0,
so let me just write this
slightly differently,
x sub n plus 1 is less than
or equal to alpha times
the absolute value of x of n.
Now, let's see what this means.
For all n bigger than
or equal M sub 0.
Let's say I look at the
absolute value of x sub n.
So now, this n has nothing
to do with these n.
It's just-- so then the absolute
value of x of n is less than
or equal to x--
so maybe I'm off by--
OK, so let's increase that by 1.
Well, so let's not
be confusing here.
Let's make this l.
Let's make that l.
So for all l bigger than
or equal to M0 plus 1.
So think of l as playing
the role of being n plus 1.
This is less than or equal
to x to the l minus 1, which
is less than or equal
to x to the l minus 2,
now with a square.
So what I have here is now alpha
times alpha x to the l minus 2.
And now, let's drop again by 1.
And I can do this as long
as this quantity here
is bigger than or
equal to M. So I
get this is, if I keep doing
that, this is less than
or equal to alpha to the
l minus M0, x to the M0.
And so, actually let's,
we shifted things--
yeah.
So now we're going
to use this to bound
the partial sums of the x of n.
So let M be a natural number.
And if we look at partial
sum, sum from n equals 1 to M
of x sub n, this is
equal to sum n equals 1.
to M0 xn plus sum from n
equals M0 plus 1 to M. x sub--
now let me just change
dummy variables for signing,
for indexing this.
So this is equal to the sum
from n equals 1 to M0 of xn.
And now, this, I'm going to
use this inequality here.
So this is kind of a mess.
So this is the inequality
that I get from this.
Remember, alpha's less than 1.
Plus-- OK.
So time's l equals M0 plus 1
to M. OK, everything's fine.
Times alpha to the
l minus M0 plus 1.
So all I did here was replace
this absolute value of x to
of x sub l.
l is just a dummy variable
for indexing these guys,
but using this inequality here.
So, sorry, I kind of messed
that up a little bit.
But the important thing is that
we have this inequality, which
somehow tells you
this series is not
that far from being
a geometric series,
at least when l is big enough.
So then, when we take an
arbitrary partial sum,
we split it up into two parts.
The stuff that comes
up to this integer
sub 0, which we
don't care about,
that's just a fixed number, plus
this part that we care about,
which is after this
fixed number M0.
And we use this
inequality to replace this
by x sub M0 plus 1, alpha
to the l minus M0 plus 1.
The thing to remember
is that little m
is the thing that's changing.
So we're trying to bound
this independent of little m.
Capital M sub 0, that's
just something fixed.
That could be 1,000.
So this is equal to sum
from n equals 1 to M0
xn, plus x sub M0 plus 1.
And now, if I change
the variable again,
so l starts at M0
plus 1 and ends at M.
So this is now a sum if I go--
so now, for the second sum, n
is equal to l minus M0 plus 1.
So now, n starts at 0 and
ends at M minus M0 plus 1,
alpha to the n.
Again, Emma, is the little-- is
the thing that's changing here.
And we're trying to bound this
independently of little m.
But now we're in good shape.
Because this looks like
a geometric series.
Alpha, remember, is less than 1.
So this is less than
or equal to sum from n
equals 1 to M0 x sub n plus
x sub n 0 plus 1 times--
now, instead of just being a sum
from 0 up to M minus M0 plus 1,
why not throw all
of it in there.
And this is equal to n equals 0,
xn, plus x to M0 plus 1 times 1
over 1 minus alpha.
Remember, alpha is a number
that we fixed to be less than 1.
If you try to do
what we did before
and not fix the alpha just a
little bit to the left of 1,
and try to do
everything with 1, you
would have wound up
with 1 to the n here.
And that wouldn't have
finished the proof.
That wouldn't have
closed the proof.
But given yourself a
little bit of room,
which is why we fix this alpha.
Now, this number here is
independent of little m.
That's the whole point.
So what have we proven?
That for all natural
numbers little m,
the nth partial sum is less
than or equal to a fixed number
given by sum from--
OK.
And therefore, this
sequence of partial sums
is bounded and
therefore converges.
So kind of the simplest
application of this
is maybe a series
that looks familiar.
So for all x--
so this is I guess a
theorem slash example.
But for all x in R, the series
x to the n over n factorial,
n equals 0 to infinity
converges absolutely here.
0 factorial is, of course, 1.
And you just use the ratio test.
So of dx to the n plus 1,
or the n plus first term
over x to the n.
So absolute value, and
this equals the limit as n
goes to infinity of
n plus 1 factorial
is equal to n plus
1 times n factorial.
So this cancels with
that n factorial.
And I get x over n
plus 1, limit as n
goes to infinity of just
this fixed number over n
plus 1 equals 0.
And this is certainly
less than 1.
And therefore, by
the ratio test,
this series
converges absolutely.
So I got a little hung
up on exactly the indexes
and matching them up precisely.
But the important thing to
take home from this proof
was that when this ratio
is less than 1, then
this series behaves very
much like a geometric series
for as the terms get very--
as you go far enough
out in the terms.
And this idea of just
trying to relate the series
to a simple series that you
know a lot about, I mean,
basically the only series that
you know everything about,
namely even how to sum it,
this is how you get this test.
And this is also
even simpler how
you get the next test,
which is the root test.
So the root test,
let's take a series.
And suppose this l, this
limit l equals the limit as n
goes to infinity of x sub
entity 1 over n exists.
Then, two conclusions, just
kind of just like in ratio test.
If l is less than 1, and
this implies that the series
converges absolutely.
And if l is bigger than 1,
then this series converges--
no, the series diverges.
And again, just like
in the ratio test,
no information for l equals 1.
You take the same series
that we looked at before.
Did I leave it up there?
Yes.
So xn-- x sub n
equals 1 for all n.
This limit here, l, exists.
It's equal to 1.
And that series diverges.
If you look at 1 over n
squared, and I take this limit,
I again get 1.
But that series converges.
So for capital l equals
1, we get no information.
So let's-- and in this
case, it's even clearer how
we're relating the series
to a geometric series.
So let's-- in my notes, I
proved two first both times.
So perhaps I should have
written it one, two.
I'll know for the future.
So suppose l is bigger than 1.
And now, we're going to show
that this series diverges,
again, by showing that the
terms do not converge to 0.
So it's the same idea as before.
Here's l, here's 1.
So for all n sufficiently large,
x to the n to the 1 over n
has to be inside this interval.
And since x to the n, x sub
n to the 1 over n converges
to l, which is
bigger than 1, this
implies there exists
an integer in 0
such that for all n bigger
than or equal to M0, x
sub n to the 1 over n is
bigger than 1, which implies
all n bigger than or equal to
M0, x sub n in absolute value
is bigger than by just
taking powers of both sides
is bigger than 1.
Now, since all of the absolute
values of x sub n's is bigger
than 1, this implies that
this cannot converge a 0.
So remember, I mean, let me
remove this absolute value.
x sub n cannot converge to 0.
Why?
I mean, we could go back
to the basic definition
of convergence, of what
it means for a sequence
to converge to a real number
x, and what it doesn't mean,
or what it means for it
to not converge to x.
So xn does not converge to 0
if there exists a bad epsilon.
So that x sub n is
outside of that interval.
As long as is outside
of that interval
if I go far enough out.
And we certainly have that here.
Or you could use--
so this bigger than
1, in fact, implies
that the lim sup of x
of n is bigger than 1.
Because if I have two
sequences, one bigger
than the other, then the
lim sup of the bigger one
is bigger than or
equal to the lim sup
of the other one, which is 1.
And you're doing in
this week's assignment,
that this converges--
that xn converges to 0 if
and only if the lim sup of
the absolute values of xn's
converge to 0.
And this is not.
It's bigger than or equal to 1.
So we'll leave that there.
So now, for the other case,
that l is less than 1.
Suppose l is less
than 1, then let alpha
be a number between l and 1.
Again, since this converges to
l, which is less than alpha,
for all n sufficiently large,
this has to be less than alpha.
So there exists an integer,
I have x to the n to the 1
over n is less than
alpha, which implies
that for all n bigger
than or equal to M0,
x to the n in absolute value
is less than alpha to the n.
So here again, we're
seeing this series,
if it satisfies
these hypotheses,
is very much acting
like a geometric series.
Remember, alpha's less than 1.
Then for every natural
number little m,
if we look at the nth partial
sum of the absolute value,
let's say n equals 1.
This is we split it
up again into a part
that we don't really care
about, plus an interesting part.
Remember, little m is the
thing that's changing.
This should look like a little
m compared to capital M0.
And this is less than or equal
to sum from n equals 1 to M0,
x sub n.
Again, this is just
a fixed number.
Plus now we can put this
inequality, n equals M0 plus 1,
m alpha to the n.
And this is less than or
equal to sum from n equals M0.
I'm going to go kind of fast
here, because I'm running out
of space on the board here.
Maybe I'll write this
out in just a minute.
But why this is true.
And this part here is less
than or equal to 1 over 1
minus alpha.
Because what do I do?
This sum is a finite sum.
And it's certainly
bigger than if I
make the lower bound smaller
and the upper bound larger.
And this is just the nth
partial sum corresponding
to a geometric series
with non-negative terms,
the alpha to the n.
And so, that's less than
or equal to sum from n
equals 0 to infinity of alpha
to the n, which equals 1 over 1
minus alpha.
So that's how we got this term.
And therefore, the
partial sums corresponding
to the series with
absolute values is bounded.
And therefore, that series with
the absolute values converges.
And we have absolute
convergence.
So now, let me state a theorem
about alternating series.
It is not--
I prefer not to call it an
alternating series test,
because there's
nothing really to test.
I mean, at least with
the ratio and root test,
you have to recompute
a limit, which
might require some work to do.
And therefore, at least to me,
that's kind of a real thing,
that you have to do
a little work to test
whether a series converges.
And for alternating series,
the test is, you look at it.
And that's it.
You don't compute anything.
You look at it.
So I prefer not to
call this theorem
about alternating series
an alternating series test.
So the theorem is, for
alternating series.
And the statement
is the following.
Let x sub n be a
monotone decreasing
sequence converging to 0.
So because this thing is
monotone, and monotone
decreasing and converging
to 0, it's all--
so let me--
I'll put this in parentheses.
Therefore xn is bigger than
or equal to 0 for all n.
I cannot have a monotone
decreasing sequence converging
to 0 if one of the
xn's is less than 0,
because they keep
getting smaller.
This is it.
This is not-- this is
all of the hypotheses.
You don't have to
compute anything.
Then the series minus 1
to the n, xn, n equals--
let's of course, we don't have
to start at 1 in particular.
But at least for this statement,
let's make it precise.
Sum from n equals 1 to
infinity of minus 1 to the n,
x to the n-- x sub n converges.
And we can just say
convergence, not necessarily
absolute convergence.
Because again, if we
look at minus 1 to the n,
1 over n, which is 1 over n is
a monotone decreasing sequence
converging to 0.
That converges,
but not absolutely.
And if we have x sub n
equal 1 over n squared,
again, 1 over n squared is a
monotone decreasing sequence
converging to 0.
That would converge absolutely.
So we just have a statement
about convergence.
So how we're going to
do this is, we are--
it's kind of like how
we proved convergence
for p series, in
that we're going
to show that a certain
subsequence of partial sums
converges.
And then, we're going
to use that to show
that the full sequence
of partial sums converge.
So let me state
this as claim one.
So the subsequence
of partial sums,
S sub 2k, so this is just the
sum from n equals 1 to 2k.
We're going to show
this converges.
So again, just to be
complete, S sub m,
this is the nth partial
sum. it is the sum from m
equals 1 to m.
So how we're going
to do this is,
we're going to show that
these partial sums are
in fact monotone decreasing
and bounded from below.
Monotone decreasing,
basically because these guys
are monotone decreasing.
And bounded from below
by the same reasoning.
So let's show that.
For k, a natural number, if I
look at S 2k, so this is a sum.
It equals 1 2k, minus
1 to the n x sub n.
Now I have the n equals 1 term,
which I can write as minus x--
so just writing this
out in a certain way.
So this is minus x1
plus x2 minus x3 plus--
and then n equals 2k is even.
So then I get plus x 2k.
This is equal to x
sub 2 minus x sub 1,
plus x sub 4 minus x sub 3,
plus all the way to x sub
2k minus x sub 2k, minus 1.
Now, this sequence is
monotone decreasing.
So x sub 2 going to be
smaller than x sub 1.
x sub 4 is going to
be less than x sub 3.
x sub 2k minus x sub 2k
minus 1 is less than 0.
So since this is
monotone decreasing,
this is bigger than or equal to.
So what I just said has nothing
to do with this inequality
I'm writing here--
yet.
So I kept everything here.
And now I add x sub 2k plus
2 minus x sub 2k plus 1.
So what I was saying
was that the x sub n's
are monotone decreasing.
This term is right
after this term.
So it's smaller than this term.
So this term here is
less than or equal to 0.
And therefore, this thing
plus itself plus something
that's negative is less
than or equal to this thing.
Now, what is this thing
on the right hand side?
This is just a x 2k minus
plus x 2k, minus x 2k plus 1,
plus x sub 2, k plus 1.
And this is the k plus
1 2k plus 1 partial sum.
Thus this series is
monotone decreasing.
So to show that the subsequence
of partial sums converges,
we just have to show
that this subsequence is
bounded, or bounded below.
If it's monotone
decreasing, it's already
bounded above by something.
So we just need to show
it's bounded from below.
Now, for all k, a natural
number, let's look at S
sub 2k and group term
slightly differently.
So this is equal now to--
I'm going to write it as
minus x1 plus x sub 3.
x sub 2 minus x sub 3,
plus x sub 4 minus x sub 5,
plus so on, plus x 2k
minus x 2k minus 1.
OK, I think-- ah,
no, that's not right.
So this is minus 2 plus x of 2k.
All right.
Now, this is right.
So this is equal to minus--
so again, the x sub n's
are monotone decreasing.
So x sub 3 is
smaller than x sub 2.
So this is non-negative.
This is also non-negative,
because x sub 5 is smaller
than x sub 4, so on and so on.
So this is also non-negative.
So S sub 2k is bigger than
or equal to minus x sub 1.
Plus non-negative terms, so 2k.
And remember, x sub
n's, these are monotone
decreasing converging to 0.
And therefore, that
they're all non-negative.
So this is bigger than or
equal to minus x sub 1.
Thus, what do we get?
So for all natural
numbers k, I have minus x1
is less than or
equal to S sub 2k.
And because these are
monotone decreasing,
this is always less than
or equal to S k equals 1.
And this is-- so if you like
S sub 2, is just minus x sub 1
plus x sub 2.
So this sequence of
numbers is bounded
between this real number
and this real number.
And therefore, it's bounded.
And since it's
monotone decreasing,
it has to have a limit.
So S sub 2k converges.
Let's call this limit something.
Let's call it S. And we'll
show that the sequence
of partial sums
converge to S now.
We just showed this for
along a sequence of--
along a subsequence
of partial sums.
Let's show it converges to
S along the full sequence.
So this is, if
you like, claim 2,
which is that the full sequence
of partial sums converges to S.
And we're going to do this by
brute force using epsilon M
argument.
So remember, to show something--
a limit of something equals
S means for all epsilon,
there exists a capital M, so
that for all M bigger than
or equal to capital M, S sub
M minus S in absolute value
is less than epsilon.
So let epsilon be positive.
Since S sub 2k convergence to S,
there exists M0 natural number.
So that all k bigger than
or equal to M0 S sub 2k
minus S in absolute value
is less than epsilon.
Now, we haven't used
at all in this proof
that the xn's really
converge to 0.
We did use that they were
non-negative at one point.
But now, this is where
we'll use a conversion to 0,
because here's the intuition.
The S sub 2k's are
converging to something.
So now, I just have to
look at the odd ones.
I've shown all the even
partial sums converge to S.
So if I can show the odd
partial sums also converge to S,
then essentially, I'm done.
What's the difference
between an even partial sum
and an odd partial sum?
Well, it's just x to the
2k plus x sub 2k plus 1,
which is converging to 0.
So they don't differ by much.
And that's essentially the
whole argument right there.
So since xn's converge to 0,
there exists natural number M
sub 1 so that for all n bigger
than or equal to M sub 1,
x of n is less than
epsilon over 2.
I should have written Epsilon.
Over 2 here.
Choose M to be the maximum
of two numbers 2M0 0
plus 1 and M1.
So you'll see why I made these
choices in just a minute.
So suppose m is bigger
than or equal to M.
We now want to show that S sub
m minus S is less than epsilon
in absolute value.
So there's two cases.
If m is even, then m
over 2 is bigger than
or equal to capital M over
2, which is the max of these.
If I divide by 2,
that's certainly
bigger than or equal to M0.
And therefore, I use this first
inequality, S sub m minus s,
which is equal to S2 times m
over 2, minus S. Now, m over 2
is an integer bigger
than or equal to m sub 0.
So I can use this inequality.
It's less than epsilon over
2, which is less than epsilon.
And now, we do odd.
So again, m is bigger than
or equal to capital M.
And there's two
cases, even and odd.
If m is odd, let k
be this integer now.
Since m is odd, m
minus 1 is even,
divided by 2, that's an integer.
And so, this is--
so m equals 2k plus 1.
And since m is bigger
than or equal to M0,
this implies a couple of things.
This implies that this integer--
so our m, this
implies that 2k plus 1
is bigger than or equal to 2.
So m is just equal to 2k plus 1.
So that's bigger
than or equal to m,
which is bigger than or
equal to 2 m sub 0 plus 1.
And therefore, k, this integer
here, is bigger than M0.
Also, m is bigger than or
equal to m sub 1 as well.
I mean, m is bigger
than or equal to m.
And m is bigger than or equal
to the max of these two things.
So it's bigger
than or equal to 1.
Then if I look at S of n minus
S, this is equal to S sub m--
so the nth partial
sum is equal to the m
minus first partial sum plus
the next term minus S. Now
m minus 1, in terms
of the integer k,
is equal to 2 times k.
And now, I'm going to take this
S and group it with this guy.
And so, since k is bigger
than or equal to m sub 0,
we can use this
inequality here after we
do the triangle inequality.
So this is less than
or equal to S 2k
minus S, plus the absolute
value of this thing.
So again, since k is bigger
than or equal to m sub 0,
I can use this inequality to
get this is less than epsilon
over 2, plus this guy.
And since m is bigger than
or equal to, capital M, which
is bigger than or equal
to capital M sub 1,
I can use this inequality.
And this is less than epsilon.
So we've done the case of m
even or m odd, m bigger than
or equal to m.
So in summary, we've
shown that if m
is bigger than or equal
to m, S sub m minus S
is less than epsilon.
And therefore, the S
sub n's converge to S.
And I don't think I have enough
time to do this next theorem.
So we'll stop there.